

3. Text-based Adventure Game
This is a basic version of the Adventure game. It is completely text-based. In this version of the game, users can move about through different rooms within a single setting, and based on the user input, it will provide descriptions for each room. This is one of the interesting python projects. 



Movement direction is crucial here – you must create walls and set the directions in which the users can move through the rooms, set movement restrictions, and also include a tracker that can track how far a user has walked or moved in the game. Mentioning Python projects can help your resume look much more interesting than others.

4. Dice Rolling Simulator


As the name of the program suggests, we will be imitating a rolling dice. This is one of the interesting python projects and will generate a random number each dice the program runs, and the users can use the dice repeatedly for as long as he wants. When the user rolls the dice, the program will generate a random number between 1 and 6 (as on a standard dice).

The number will then be displayed to the user. It will also ask users if they would like to roll the dice again. The program should also include a function that can randomly grab a number within 1 to 6 and print it. This beginner-level python projects will help build a strong foundation for fundamental programming concepts.

5. Hangman
This is more of a “guess the word” game. The core concepts you have to use while developing this project are variables, random, integer, strings, char, input and output, and boolean. In the game, users have to enter letter guesses, and each user will have a limited number of guesses (a counter variable is needed for limiting the guesses). This is one of the interesting python projects to begin with. 

You can create a pre-organized list of words that users can grab words from. Also, you must include specific functions to check whether or not a user has entered a single letter or if the input letter is in the hidden word, to if the user has actually inputted a single letter, and to print the correct outcomes (letters).

6. Contact Book


This is one of the excellent python projects for beginners. Everyone uses a contact book to save contact details, including name, address, phone number, and even email address. This is a command-line project where you will design a contact book application that users can use to save and find contact details. The application should also allow users to update contact information, delete contacts, and list saved contacts. The SQLite database is the ideal platform for saving contacts. To handle a project with Python for beginners can be helpful to build your career with a good start.

7. Email Slicer
This is one of the convenient python projects that has a lot of use in the future. The program helps get you the username and domain name from an email address. You can even customize the application and send a message to the host with this information.

8. Binary search algorithm
Have you ever heard the proverb, “finding a needle in a haystack.” This program is designed to do just that- by using a binary search algorithm. You can create a list of random numbers between 0 to 100, with every succeeding number having a difference of 2 between them.



When the user inputs a random number, the program will check if that number is included in the list. It will do so by creating two halves of the list. If the program finds the number in the first half of the list, it will eliminate the other half and vice versa. The search will continue until the program finds the number input of the user or until the subarray size becomes 0 (this means that the number is not in the list). This python project idea will help you create an implement an algorithm that searches for an element in a list. 

9. Desktop Notifier App
Have you ever wondered how notifications work? This small python project idea will throw some light on this. The desktop notifier apps run on your system and send you a piece of information after a fixed interval of time. We suggest you use libraries such as notify2, requests, etc. to build such a program.

10. Python Story Generator


This is a fun but exciting python project which will work wonders with kids. In a nutshell, the program will ask users for inputs such as the name of a place, action, etc. and then build a story around the data. The story will be the same always but with little variation with the input.

11. YouTube video downloader


One of the best ideas to start experimenting with you hands-on python projects for students is working on a YouTube video downloader. More than a billion people watch YouTube every month. Sometimes there are videos we like to download permanently. YouTube doesn’t give you that option, but you can create an app with a simple UI and the ability to download YouTube videos in different formats and video quality. This project looks tough, but it is straightforward when you start working on it.

12. Python Website Blocker


When we surf the internet, many unwanted websites keep showing up. This is one of the useful python projects where you can build a program that blocks certain websites from opening. This program is beneficial for students who want to study without any social media distractions. Mentioning python project can help your resume look much more interesting than others.

13. Spin a Yarn
Things get more interesting here since strings are infinitely more complex to play with at the beginning.

The program first prompts the user to enter a series of inputs. These can be an adjective, a preposition, a proper noun, etc. Once all the inputs are in place, they are placed in a premade story template using concatenation. In the end, the full story is printed out to read some misintended madness!

14. What’s the word?
This name focuses on the user having to guess the randomly generated word. You can create a list from which the word would have to be guessed and also set a cap on the number of guesses allowed.

After this, you can create the rules yourself! When the user inputs the word, you can indicate whether the alphabet written appears in this particular position or not. You will need a function to check if the user is inputting alphabets or numbers and to display error messages appropriately.

15. Rock, Paper, Scissors
If you are tired of having no playmate, then a 5-minute stint of rock, paper, scissors with the computer and designed by you, yourself will improve your mood.

We again use the random function here. You make a move first and then the program makes one. To indicate the move, you can either use a single alphabet or input an entire string. A function will have to be set up to check the validity of the move.



Using another function, the winner of that round is decided. You can then either give an option of playing again or decide a pre-determined number of moves in advance. A scorekeeping function will also have to be created which will return the winner at the end.

16. Leap it!
In this python project, you input a year and check whether it is a leap year or not. For this, you’ll have to create a function that recognizes the pattern of leap years and can try fitting the inputted year into the pattern. In the end, you can print the result using a boolean expression.

17. Find out, Fibonacci!
You input a number and the function created checks whether the number belongs to the Fibonacci sequence or not. The underlying workings are similar to the above ‘Leap it!’ program.

One common theme in all the above projects is that they will help you to get your basics right. You will be the developer and the bug fixer. Not to mention, you’ll be closing working with creating and implementing a variety of functions along with working with variables, strings, integers, operators, etc. Just like 2 + 2 is the building block of your mathematics knowledge, so are these concepts, and learning about them in a fun way through building projects will help to understand and retain them more.

These are some of the most straightforward Python project ideas for you to work on. Once you finish these, let’s move to the next level.

Read: Machine Learning Project Ideas For Beginners

Python Project Ideas: Intermediate Level
18. Calculator


Although there isn’t much use of a calculator, however, building your graphical UI calculator will make you familiar with a library like Tkinter in which you can create buttons to perform different operations and display results on a screen.

19. Countdown Clock and Timer
It is another utility app in which the user can set a timer, and the app notifies you when time is up.

20. Random Password Generator
Creating a strong password and remembering it is a tedious task. You can build a program that intakes some words from the user and then generates a random password using those words. The user can remember the password with the help of the words he gave as an input.

21. Random Wikipedia Article
This is a complicated yet straightforward program. The program searches Wikipedia and fetches a random article. Then it asks the user if he wants to read that article or not. If the answer is yes, the material is shown; otherwise, another random report is presented.

Data Science Advanced Certification, 250+ Hiring Partners, 300+ Hours of Learning, 0% EMI

22. Reddit Bot


This is one of the excellent python project ideas for beginners. Reddit is a handy platform, and many people want to be online as much as they can. You can program a bot that monitors subreddits and reports whenever they find something useful. It will save Redditors a lot of time and provide helpful information with it.

23. Python Command-Line Application
Python is known for building outstanding command-line applications. You can create your program, which can help you send emails to other people. The program will ask your credentials and the content of the email, then send the data using your created command line.

24. Alarm Clock


This is one of the interesting python project ideas. People all across the globe use alarm clock applications. It is quite a simple Command Line Interface (CLI) Python application for an intermediate-level developer. However, this project isn’t your run-of-the-mill alarm clock. In this application, you can input YouTube links in a text file and design the application to read the file. If you set a particular time in the alarm clock, it will pick a random YouTube link from the text file and play the YouTube video.

25. Tic-Tac-Toe
We all have fond memories of playing Tic-Tac-Toe with our friends in school, don’t we? It is one of the most fun games you can play anywhere – all you need is a pen and paper! Usually, two players can play Tic-Tac-Toe at a time. The players create a 3×3 square grid. This is one of the coolest python project ideas. 

While the first player puts “X” in any one of the squares, and the second player will put an “O” in any square. This process will continue until all the squares are filled with each player putting X and O alternatively. The player who succeeds in creating a horizontal, vertical, or diagonal with three consecutive X or O on the grid wins.

You can use the Pygame library for building this project. Pygame is loaded with all the modules you need for computer graphics and sound.

26. Steganography
Steganography is the art of hiding a secret message in another form of media, for example, hiding a coded message in an image or video. You can create a program that protects messages inside pictures for you.

27. Currency converter


This is a simple GUI application that you can develop using Python. As you can guess by the name, you will build a currency converter that can convert currencies from one unit to another, for example, converting Indian rupee into pound or euro.

The design of this application will be straightforward – the main focus should be the primary function, that is, converting currency units from one to another. You can use Tkinter, the standard Python interface to the Tk GUI toolkit shipped along with Python.

28. Post-it Notes
Post-it notes are an excellent way to note down trivial chores so that you don’t forget to do them. In this project, we’ll make a virtual version of the physical, adhesive post-it notes. The main goal of building this application is to allow users to carry their post-it notes wherever they go (since it is on a digital platform).

The application should have an option for account creation, different layouts for post-it notes, and a categorization feature to allow users to segment their notes. You can consider using Django for this project since it has an in-built user authentication feature.

29. Site Connectivity Checker
The job of a site connectivity checker is to visit a URL and display the status of that URL, that is, whether or not it is a live URL. Usually, site connectivity checkers visit URLs at regular intervals and return the results each time. This project will work on the same lines – it will check the live status of URLs. Site connectivity checker is one of the interesting python projects for beginners.

You must design the code for this application from scratch. As for your connections, you can either opt for TCP or ICMP. You can use click, docopt, or argparse frameworks for adding commands that will enable users to add and delete URLs from the list of URLs they want to check. 

30. Directory Tree Generator
A Directory Tree Generator lets you visualize the relationship between files and directories, thereby making it easier to understand the positioning of files and directories. For this project, you can use os library to list the files and directories within a specific directory. Again, docopt or argparse frameworks are excellent tools for the project. 

Read: Python Developer Salary in India

These are some intermediate Python project ideas on which you can work. If you still like to test your knowledge and take on some tough projects

Python Project Ideas: Advanced Level
31. Speed Typing Test


Let’s start advanced python project ideas for beginners. Do you remember the old typing test game which was used in Windows XP and before? You can create a similar program that tests your typing speed. First, you need to create a UI using a library like Tkinter. Then create a fun typing test that displays the user speed, accuracy, and words per minute in the end. You can also find source code for the program online.

32. Content Aggregator
The internet is filled with websites, articles, and information. When we want to find something, it is tough to go through each of them. For this use, you can create a content aggregator that automatically searches popular websites and looks for relevant content and then complies with all the content and lets the user choose which content they want. It is very much like Google but unbiased. And this is the perfect idea for your next python project!

33. Bulk File Rename/ Image Resize Application
This is an advanced project which needs you to be well-versed in Machine Learning. We will begin by teaching the program on how to pre-process data, then perform a few resize and rename images tasks. As the program starts learning, it can handle bulk functions at once.

34. Python File Explorer
This is a significant project as it will test your knowledge on the various concepts of Python. You need to build an app that anyone uses to explore the files in their system. You can also add features like searching and copy-paste. Tkinter is a commendable choice for this project as it makes the development of GUI applications fast and easy.

To create the Python File Explorer using Tkinter, you have to import the filedialog module from Tkinter. This module is designed for opening files and directories and saving them.